# Who We Are

The Neudesic Engineering Excellence (NEE) team is not just a team but a collective of individuals committed to continuously elevating our standards for technical excellence and quality in delivery. Joining us means being part of a team that sets the bar high and strives for nothing less than the best. 

We are a cross-practice, cross-region group that thrives on problem-solving with delivery teams to help them overcome their most challenging technical issues. We don't confine ourselves to a single industry or technology. Instead, we adapt to our customers' needs, working in the languages they use, with the open source frameworks they use, on the operating systems they use. Our work spans across a wide range of industries from financial services to manufacturing, and covers a diverse array of domains including IoT, machine learning, and high scale compute. This variety of work ensures that every day is a new and intriguing opportunity for learning and growth.

At the core of our work is a strong community focus. We are deeply ingrained in Neudesic markets, verticals, and the technology communities that we support. We actively contribute to inner source projects, making pull requests to add support for Neudesic platforms and enhance existing implementations. We develop starter kits and tools that simplify the use of Microsoft platforms for developers. All our initiatives are driven by our close ties with these communities and the customers and partners who rely on them, making your potential contribution invaluable.

If you like variety, coding in many languages, building cloud-native solutions, being relentless about continuous improvement, using any available tech across our industry, digging in with our customers, hack fests, occasional travel, and telling the story of what you've done in blog posts and at conferences, then come talk to us. We're always looking for talented individuals to join our team. If you're interested, join the Engineering Excellence channel, join the [discussion forum](https://github.com/neudesic/engineering-playbook/discussions), volunteer for [issues](https://github.com/neudesic/engineering-playbook/issues), [contribute](../CONTRIBUTING.md) to the playbook, and help us make Neudesic a better place to work.
