# Using DocFx and Companion Tools to generate a Documentation website

If you want a quick way to have a website with all your documentation coming from Markdown files and comments coming from code, you can use [DocFx](https://dotnet.github.io/docfx/). The website generated by DocFx also includes fast search capabilities. There are some gaps in the DocFx solution, but we've provided companion tools that help you fill those gaps. Also see the blog post [Providing quality documentation in your project with DocFx and Companion Tools](https://mtirion.medium.com/providing-quality-documentation-in-your-project-with-docfx-and-companion-tools-76aed42b1ddd) for more explanation about the solution.

## Quick Start

To get you started quickly from scratch, a zip-file is provided which can be used with some common folder, files and settings mentioned in the steps below. Copy the content from the [DocFxQuickStart folder](https://github.com/microsoft/code-with-engineering-playbook/tree/main/docs/documentation/recipes/DocFxQuickStart) folder to your own folder.

> **TLDR;**
>
> If you want a really quick start using Azure DevOps and Azure App Service without reading the what and how, follow these steps:
>
> 1. If you don't have it yet, create a project in Azure DevOps and create a Service Connection to your Azure environment. Clone the repository.
> 2. Copy the contents of the DocFxQuickStart folder to the root of the repository
> 3. Create a resource group in your Azure environment where the documentation website resources should be created.
> 4. Fill in the default values in **infrastructure/variables.tf** and run the commands from [Step 4 - Deploy Azure resources from your local machine](https://github.com/microsoft/code-with-engineering-playbook/tree/main/docs/documentation/recipes/deploy-docfx-azure-website/#4-Running-the-commands-locally) to create the Azure Resources.
> 5. Fill in the variables in **.pipelines/documentation.yml**, commit the changes and push the contents of the repository to your branch (possibly through a PR).
> 6. Create a pipeline in your Azure DevOps project that uses the **.pipelines/documentation.yml** and run it.
>

## More on this

This is just the quick start of the complete documentation. Please go to [Using DocFx and Companion Tools to generate a Documentation website in the CSE Playbook](https://github.com/microsoft/code-with-engineering-playbook/tree/main/docs/documentation/recipes/using-docfx-and-tools/) for all the contents of this walkthrough.
